---
title: "Source Code Documentation in Ruby: RDoc for Ruby CDK"
published: "2006-12-05T00:00:00.000Z"
---

Good source code documentation tools can greatly enhance developer productivity at almost no cost. By eliminating the need to dig through source code files for documentation, tools like Java's <a href="http://java.sun.com/j2se/javadoc/">Javadoc</a> are invaluable for quickly seeing the big picture of a new piece of software. They are also handy as a quick reminder for more familiar APIs.

Ruby comes complete with a source code documentation tool called "RDoc." Running RDoc over your Ruby source produces a group of cross-linked HTML files in a manner analogous to Javadoc.

The <a href="http://depth-first.com/articles/2006/10/30/agile-chemical-informatics-development-with-cdk-and-ruby-rcdk-0-3-0">Ruby CDK</a> distribution contains HTML API documentation generated by RDoc and located in the `doc` subdirectory. This documentation was automatically generated with a task written for Ruby's build system, <a href="http://docs.rubyrake.org/">Rake</a>. This task, contained in the file `Rakefile`, is shown below:

```ruby
Rake::RDocTask.new do |rdoc|
  rdoc.rdoc_dir = 'doc'
  rdoc.title    = "Ruby CDK"
  rdoc.rdoc_files.include('README')
  rdoc.options << '--line-numbers'
  rdoc.options << '--inline-source'
  rdoc.options << '--main' << 'README'
  rdoc.rdoc_files.include('lib/**/*.rb')
end
```

Unlike Java's build tool, <a href="http://ant.apache.org/">Ant</a>, Rake isn't based on XML. Instead, the entire build system is pure Ruby. This introduces a level of clarity and brevity into the build process that simply doesn't exist with Ant.

Ruby CDK's RDoc task extends the built-in Rake task named appropriately enough `RDocTask`. The customization of this task lies completely within the constructor block. Among other modifications, this block activates inlined source code with line numbers, a very handy feature given Ruby's highly dynamic nature.

As a convenience, <a href="http://depth-first.com/doc/rcdk/">Ruby CDK's RDoc documentation</a> is now available online. The API and schema documentation for my other software projects will appear soon on Depth-First in the sidebar to the right.