---
title: Open Access Business Models That Can Actually Work - Sigma-Aldrich's ChemBlogs
published: "2007-10-11T00:00:00.000Z"
---

A gem of a chemistry blog has been operating for some time - apparently without much notice. [ChemBlogs](http://chemblogs.com/sial_blog/) is Sigma-Aldrich's Web answer to their [Aldrichimica Acta](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/Brands/Aldrich/Aldrichimica_Acta.html) print magazine, and it's packed with mini-reviews on synthetic chemistry with links to the primary literature. This approach to scientific marketing has so much potential, I can't imagine why others aren't doing it.

Nevertheless, there are some small things that could be done to make ChemBlogs a lot more effective. Here, in no particular order, are some suggestions:

-  **Submit the RSS feed to Chemical Blogspace.** [Chemical Blogspace](http://cb.openmolecules.net/posts.php) is perhaps the most widely-read aggregator of free chemistry content on the Web. And it's one of the best ways to get your chemistry blog noticed, bookmarked, and linked to.
-  **Make it easier to discover and use a post's permalink.** If I see an article I like in ChemBlogs, such as [this one on gold catalysis](http://chemblogs.com/sial_blog/index.php?blog=2&title=chem_gem_chloro_triphenylphosphine_gold_&more=1&c=1&tb=1&pb=1), there's no obvious way for me to link to it in my own blog. Standard practice is that all titles on the front page are hyperlinked to the article's permalink. [This article](/articles/2007/10/03/designing-the-obvious-permalinks-and-paradigms) discusses the importance of permalinks.
-  **Don't moderate comments - use reCAPTCHA instead.** Nothing stifles online discussion like moderated comments. The Web is about immediacy. Make a change and see it live instantly. Everything else is so 1999. If spam is the concern, [reCAPTCHA](/articles/2007/09/18/six-reasons-i-like-recaptcha-or-how-to-build-a-web-service-worth-talking-about) is a wonderful tool for the job.
-  **Drop the company group when identifying authors.** No reader cares whether Sharbil J. Firsan is part of the Marketing Group or not. In fact, it's a bit of a turn-off to have the word "Marketing" appear at all.
-  **Each author should have an online bio that links to their name.** Although titles and company divisions are not useful, other information about authors is. In a multi-author blog like ChemBlogs, the byline should hyperlink to a bio of the author, or a collection of their writing. This makes it easier for readers to follow authors they like.
-  **Link to the primary literature via DOI.** ChemBlogs cites many articles appearing in journals, which is a great thing. Unfortunately, there's no way for a search engine to know that this is happening. The simple fix is to hyperlink a literature citation to the DOI entry, like this one for [*Chem. Rev.* **1994**, <em>94</em>, 2483-2547](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/cr00032a009).
-  **Include InChIs for all important structures.** Free tools like [InChIMatic](http://inchimatic.com) can then be used to quickly find articles dealing with those molecules.
-  **Post more frequently and/or regularly.** More content means more eyeballs. When it's regularly posted, readers know when to expect it.
-  **Invite some working scientists to write articles.** If recent experience with [Wikipedia and Chemistry](/articles/2006/09/08/chemical-reviews-on-wikipedia) is any guide, there are plenty of capable scientist more than willing to create free, high-quality compound monographs and other chemical content. Invite some of them to contribute very short articles for ChemBlogs in their area of expertise and see what happens.
-  **Release all content under a [Creative Commons License](http://creativecommons.org/).** Information wants to be free - why not make it free? Allowing ChemBlogs' content to spread far and wide just makes it that much more visible. For example, at last count, Depth-First content was reproduced on about a dozen other Web sites, including one [in Korean](/articles/2007/08/31/cheminformatics-in-korean-an-example-of-scientific-self-organization). This matches my goals exactly, and it's all perfectly legal thanks to the way the content is licensed.

With a little tweaking, Sigma-Aldrich's experiment in [Permission Marketing](http://www.sethgodin.com/permission/) could pay off - for everyone. Readers would conveniently get useful bits of information to make them more productive. The Internet would get new, high-quality chemical content - free to use and link to. Who knows - this might even become an [Open Access business model](/articles/2007/07/16/go-west-young-man-does-open-access-really-matter-in-the-long-run) that [actually  works](/articles/2007/08/07/yale-university-libraries-cancel-biomed-central-membership-in-the-face-of-spiraling-costs).

And Sigma-Aldrich would have a far more effective marketing tool than anything else they currently use. With the possible exception of the [Handbook](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/cgi-bin/hsrun/Suite7/Suite/Suite.hjx;start=Suite.HsEgrailForm.run?FormName=AldrichHandbook0708_87244), but even that could change.
